If you need to run different learning models
alongside a deep net – perhaps as an ensemble

– then H2O.ai might be a good choice. This
software platform offers one deep net – the

multilayer perceptron – and a few other
machine learning algorithms. Let’s take

a look.

H2O started out as an open-source machine
learning platform, with deep nets being a

recent addition. Besides a set of machine
learning algorithms, the platform offers several

useful features, such as data pre-processing.

Currently, the only deep net supported by
H2O is the multilayer perceptron. Despite

this, the platform has sophisticated data
munging capabilities as well as an intuitive

model management UI. The other supported machine
learning models include a GLM, a Distributed

Random Forest, K-Means clustering, a gradient
boosting machine that uses an ensemble of

decision trees, a cox proportional hazard,
and a Naïve Bayes classifier. Training with

backpropagation is performed by means of the
L-BFGS algorithm.

Thankfully, H2O comes with built-in integration
tools for platforms like HDFS, Amazon S3,

SQL, and NoSQL.

While the platform has an intuitive UI, you
can access the tools through a familiar programming

environment like R, Python, JSON, and several
others. You can even model and analyze data

with Tableau, Microsoft Excel, and R Studio.
H2O also offers ensemble training, which allows

you to obtain a model with the optimal set
of hyper-parameters.

Unlike Ersatz, H2O is provided as a downloadable
software package, which you'll need to deploy

and manage on your own hardware infrastructure.
To help with this, the platform provides an

in-memory map-reduce capability, distributed
parallel processing, and columnar compression.

These additions should help speed up your
training significantly. The creators’ hope

was that search and analytics would be interactive,
but this does not apply to training; instead,

they hoped that the trained nets could make
predictions about new data on the fly, perhaps

even in nano-seconds. As one final note, it’s
not clear whether or not GPU support is built-in

to the platform at this time. Although, you
can access your deep net programmatically

through an API.

H2O offers a lot of interesting features,
but the website can be a bit confusing to

navigate. There are a lot of different options
and it may take some time to figure out how

to use the platform to meet your needs. Still,
if your interested in building your own deep

net, it’s worth checking out.

If you have any experience using the H2O.ai
platform, please comment and share your experiences.

We’d love to hear from you.

Next up, we’ll take a look at Dato GraphLab
Create.

