When we look at a picture, our brain often
spins what we see into an intricate narrative

based on what we know, and how we feel.

Deep Learning is on the verge of creating
this type of cognitive ability in an artificial

neural net.

Neural Storyteller is a fun machine vision
project that will observe a digital image,

and then attempt to imagine a romance short
story based on what it sees.

Jason Toy of Somatic has incorporated this
into their model marketplace, so anyone can

try it out.

Let’s take a closer look at what Neural
Storyteller is, and how it works.

Neural Storyteller is the brainchild of Jamie
Ryan Kiros, a PhD student at the University

of Toronto’s Machine Learning Group.

Neural nets may be inspired by the brain,
but getting an artificial net to imagine a

story like a human is no easy task.

In his blog post, Jason Toy gives a detailed
explanation of the process while breaking

it down into a few steps.

In the first step, we feed images into a net
as input and, as output, we generate sentences

describing that image.

Back in Episode 9, we saw how a recurrent
net could perform image captioning by taking

a single image as input, and generating a
sequence as output.

The image captions used for training are generated
from the MSCOCO database.

We also need a mechanism to generate a story
that goes beyond the individual elements of

the image.

So in the second step, we need to devise a
skip-thought model, which will generate text

in the style of a romance story.

A similar type of model is the skip-gram,
which uses a target word to predict the surrounding

words, also called the context.

The skip-thought model predicts the surrounding
text for a given sentence, called a thought.

The romance text for Neural Storyteller was
obtained from the BookCorpus.

Image captions and romance stories usually
have different word patterns due to differences

in style.

Generally speaking, captions are straightforward
and factual, while romance stories tend to

be much more emotive.

As a result, the word vectors for these language
styles tend to be dissimilar.

So in a final step, we need to bridge this
gap by building a model that can perform a

transformation from one style to another.

For more details on this process, check out
the links in the video description below.

Here is Jason Toy to introduce Somatic and
give us a demo of Neural Storyteller.

Here we are going to demo Neural Storyteller
running on Somatic platform.

Somatic’s goal is to make Deep Learning
accessible to everyone.

We accomplish this in two ways; first, by
hosting pre-built deep learning models so

anyone can use and interact with models without
having to deal with the pains normally associated

with running and building them.

Secondly, Somatic has its own engine where
you can build your own models or customize

existing models like Neural Storyteller.

Neural Storyteller is a model where you upload
an image and it generates a mini story related

to the picture.

In this instance of neural storyteller, we’ve
trained it on romance novels.

Neural Storyteller is similar to neural style
transfer but for text instead of images.

You can either interact with any model via
APIs; we have libraries for all the major languages

Or you can use a web-form to directly
upload to the website.

So I am gonna upload this picture of the earth
to the website.

And then I will submit the model.

You can put an email here if you wanna get
notified.

So here, you can see the results.

.

So you can see this model recognized high
level features from the image.

It talks about the sky - talks about the sun
- the world - moonlight - so the image as

you can see was influencing the text that
was generated.

Lets look at another example.

Here this is a picture of a car that got uploaded
and as you can see, it mentions car, it mentions

building, New York City and street; so once
again, many of the prominent features were

used to generate the story.

As I mentioned earlier, this version of Neural
Storyteller was trained on romance novels.

But as long as you have access to large bodies
of text, you can train your own version of

any other kind of text.

Imagine a version that was trained on law
documents or Wikipedia or from some other

famous author.

They would talk about whats in the image;
there are lots of different things you could

do.

You can try to train your own version on Somatic
platform.

While the results vary in terms of accuracy,
Neural Storyteller is a great starting point

for this type of technology.

If you wanna learn more about Deep Learning,
hang around after this for our recommendations,

or visit us on Facebook and Twitter.

Thanks for watching, and we'll see you next
time!

