If you want your computer to recognize VERY
complex patterns – then trust me on this

– you really need to start using neural
networks.

When the patterns get really complex, neural
nets start to outperform all of their competition.

Plus, GPUs can train them faster than ever
before!

Let’s take a look.

Neural nets truly have the potential to revolutionize
the field of Artificial Intelligence.

We all know that computers are very good with
repetitive calculations and detailed instructions,

but they’ve historically been bad at recognizing
patterns.

Thanks to deep learning, this is all about
to change.

If you only need to analyze simple patterns,
a basic classification tool like an SVM or

Logistic Regression is typically good enough.

But when your data has 10s of different inputs
or more, neural nets start to win out over

the other methods.

Still, as the patterns get even more complex,
neural networks with a small number of layers

can become unusable.

The reason is that the number of nodes required
in each layer grows exponentially with the

number of possible patterns in the data.

Eventually training becomes way too expensive
and the accuracy starts to suffer.

So for an intricate pattern – like an image
of a human face, for example – basic classification

engines and shallow neural nets simply aren’t
good enough – the only practical choice

is a deep net.

Have you ever run into a wall when trying
to work with highly complex data?

Please comment and let me know your thoughts.

But what enables a deep net to recognize these
complex patterns?

The key is that deep nets are able to break
the complex patterns down into a series of

simpler patterns.

For example, let’s say that a net had to
decide whether or not an image contained a

human face.

A deep net would first use edges to detect
different parts of the face – the lips,

nose, eyes, ears, and so on – and would
then combine the results together to form

the whole face.

This important feature – using simpler patterns
as building blocks to detect complex patterns

– is what gives deep nets their strength.

The accuracy of these nets has become very
impressive – in fact, a deep net from google

recently beat a human at a pattern recognition
challenge.

It’s not surprising that deep nets were
inspired by the structure of our own human

brains.

Even in the early days of neural networks,
researches wanted to link a large number of

perceptrons together in a layered web – an
idea which helped improve their accuracy.

It is believed that our brains have a very
deep architecture and that we decipher patterns

just like a deep net – we detect complex
patterns by first detecting, and combining,

the simple ones.

There is one downside to all of this – deep
nets take much longer to train.

The good news is that recent advances in computing
have really reduced the amount of time it

takes to properly train a net.

High performance GPUs can finish training
a complex net in under a week, when fast CPUs

may have taken weeks or even months.

Before we talk more about the various Deep
Learning models, we’re going to briefly

discuss which types of deep nets are suitable
for different machine learning tasks.

That’s coming up in the next video.

