If you’ve ever shopped for clothes online,
then you’ve probably noticed a list of recommended

items somewhere on the web page.

These product recommendations are usually
built by analyzing the past purchasing behavior

of the store’s customers.

But Deep nets are revolutionizing this aspect
of the fashion world by learning how to identify

matching clothing combinations that most people
would find appealing.

Indico is a cloud-based Deep Learning service
that has used the concept of transfer learning

to build a demo for the fashion matching problem.

Let’s take a closer look.

Indico is a group of innovators in Boston aiming
to revolutionize software through powerful,

developer-friendly machine learning.  Their
state of the art deep learning algorithms

have enabled companies to automatically extract
meaningful information from unstructured data

regardless of size or capability.

The team has built a Custom Collection API,
which is a set of rich features trained on

100s of millions of examples. Using Transfer
Learning, their models can handle messy unstructured

data, making them even more effective.

Machine learning models are excellent for
recognizing patterns within a narrow domain.

Transfer learning allows you to take a model
that's been trained to solve one task, and

tweak it to solve another task. This is a
familiar concept in the machine learning space,

but recent progress in deep learning has made
it much more effective compared to traditional

machine learning techniques. This is because
deep neural networks learn many layers of

features, and when properly trained, the knowledge
encoded by these features can be useful for

solving many related tasks, not just the one
it was originally trained to solve. So instead

of training a model from scratch every time,
you can jump-start your model using features

from a similar pre-trained model, and then
use your data to fine-tune the features for

your specific problem. Remember, with traditional
machine learning, all these learned features

are written by hand -- the model doesn’t
figure them out by itself, like a deep learning

model would. So, transfer learning wouldn’t
work well with traditional machine learning

features; for interesting problems, no one
knows how to write transferable features by

hand.

indico’s Custom Collection API is built
around this idea of knowledge transfer. Just

to give an example…since the API has been
trained on large volumes of text data, you

could potentially fine-tune the API for a
specific Natural Language Processing task

in a domain of your choosing. Because of transfer
learning, you’d need a much smaller training

set than if you were building the net from
scratch, and you’d still be able to obtain

remarkably good accuracy. The API has also
been trained on many images, so the same concept

holds true for image recognition applications.

Next up - Part 2 of this video with the fashion
matching demo by Amanda Sivaraj of indico.

If you wanna learn more about Deep Learning,
hang around after this for our recommendations,

or visit us on Facebook and Twitter. Thanks
for watching, and we'll see you next time!

