At this point, you’re probably eager to
use a deep net in one of your own applications.

If that’s the case, let me introduce you
to a few platforms that allow you to utilize

these nets without the hassle of building
one yourself.

Deep Learning platforms come in two different
forms – software platforms and full platforms.

Let’s see how they work.

A platform is a set of tools that other people
can build on top of.

For example, think of the applications that
can be built off of the tools provided by

iOS and Android, Windows and MacOS, IBM Websphere,
and even Oracle BEA.

So a Deep Learning platform provides a set
of tools and an interface for building custom

deep nets.

Typically, they provide a user with a selection
of deep nets to choose from, along with the

ability to integrate data from different sources,
manipulate data, and manage models through

a UI.

Some platforms also help with performance
if a net needs to be trained with a large

data set.

Have you ever used a Deep Learning platform
in one of your own projects?

Please comment and share your experiences.

Later in the series, we will introduce you
to software libraries that will help you code

your own deep nets.

There are some advantages and disadvantages
of using a platform vs. using a software library.

A platform is an out-of-the-box application
that lets you configure a deep net’s hyper-parameters

through an intuitive UI; with a platform,
you don’t need to know anything about coding

in order to use the tools.

The downside is that you are constrained by
the platform’s selection of deep nets as

well as the configuration options.

But for anyone looking to quickly deploy a
deep net, a platform is the best way to go.

A software library is a set of functions and
modules that you can call through your own

code in order to perform certain tasks.

Deep net libraries give you a lot of extra
flexibility with net selection and hyper-parameter

configuration.

For example, there aren’t many platforms
that let you build a Recursive Neural Tensor

Net, but you can code your own with the right
deep net library!

The obvious downside to libraries is the coding
experience required to use them, but if you

need the flexibility, they really are a great
resource.

Soon we’ll take a look at Ersatz Labs, a
dedicated Deep Learning platform that handles

all the technical issues like code, deployments,
and performance – and allows the user to

go straight to modelling.

We’ll also look at two machine learning
software platforms called H2O, and GraphLab

Create, both of which offer Deep Learning
tools.

Note that since the latter two are software
platforms and not full platforms like Ersatz,

they would need to be installed on your own
personal hardware.

Coming up next, we’ll first see an overview
of Ersatz Labs.

